enneth R. H.
Mackenzie, and appended to my prose translation of the Odyssey. The
present abridgement however, will contain all that is of use to the
reader, for the biographical value of the treatise is most
insignificant. Having set sail from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached
Ithaca. Here Melesigenes, who had already suffered in his eyes, became
much worse, and Mentes, who was about to leave for Leucadia, left him
to the medical superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the
son of Alcinor. Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes
rapidly became acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which
afterwards formed the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca
assert, that it was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the
Colophomans make their city the seat of that misfortune. He then
returned to Smyrna, where he applied himself to the study of poetry.—I.e. both of composing and reciting verses for as Blair
observes, "The first poets sang their own verses." Sextus Empir.
adv. Mus. p. 360 ed. Fabric. Ou hamelei ge toi kai oi poiaetai
melopoioi legontai, kai ta Omaerou epae to palai pros lyran aedeto.
"The voice," observes Heeren, "was always accompanied by some
instrument. The bard was provided with a harp on which he played a
prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he accompanied
the song when begun. His voice probably preserved a medium between
singing and recitation; the words, and not the melody were regarded by
the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to remain intelligible to
all. In countries where nothing similar is found, it is difficult to
represent such scenes to the mind; but whoever has had an opportunity
of listening to the improvisation of Italy, can easily form an idea of
Demodocus and Phemius."—Ancient Greece, p. 94.
But poverty soon drove him to Cumae. Having passed over the Hermaean
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumae.
Here his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of
one Tychias, an armourer. "And up to my time," continued the author,
"the inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a
recitation of his verses, and they greatly honoured the spot. Here also
a poplar grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes
arrived"."Should it not be, since my arrival? asks
Mackenzie, observing that "poplars can hardly live so long".  But
setting aside the fact that we must not expect consistency in a mere
romance, the ancients had a superstitious belief in the great age of
trees which grew near places consecrated by the presence of gods and
great men. See Cicero de Legg II I, sub init., where he speaks of the
plane tree under which Socrates used to walk and of the tree at Delos,
where Latona gave birth to Apollo. This passage is referred to by
Stephanus of Byzantium, s. v. N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinedo. I
omit quoting any of the dull epigrams ascribed to Homer for, as Mr.
Justice Talfourd rightly observes, "The authenticity of these fragments
depends upon that of the pseudo Herodotean Life of Homer, from which
they are taken." Lit of Greece, pp. 38 in Encycl. Metrop. Cf.
Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 317.
But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being
the most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph
on Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater
probability, been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.It is
quoted as the work of Cleobulus, by Diogenes Laert. Vit. Cleob. p. 62,
ed. Casaub.
Arrived at Cumae, he frequented the converzationesI
trust I am justified in employing this as an equivalent for the Greek
leschai. of the old men, and delighted all by the charms of his
poetry. Encouraged by this favourable reception, he declared that, if
they would allow him a public maintenance, he would render their city
most gloriously  renowned. They avowed their willingness to support him
in the measure he proposed, and procured him an audience in the
council. Having made the speech, with the purport of which our author
has forgotten to acquaint us, he retired, and left them to debate
respecting the answer to be given to his proposal.
The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poet's
demand, but one man observed that "if they were to feed Homers,
they would be encumbered with a multitude of useless people." "From
this circumstance," says the writer, "Melesigenes acquired the name of
Homer, for the Cumans call blind men Homers."Os ei
tous, Homerous doxei trephein autois, omilon pollon te kai achreoin
exousin. enteuthen de kai tounoma Homeros epekrataese to Melaesigenei
apo taes symphoraes oi gar Kumaioi tous tuphlous Homerous legousin.
Vit. Hom. l. c. p. 311. The etymology has been condemned by
recent scholars. See Welcker, Epische Cyclus, p. 127, and Mackenzie's
note, p. xiv. With a love of economy, which shows how similar the
world has always been in its treatment of literary men, the pension was
denied, and the poet vented his disappointment in a wish that Cumoea
might never produce a poet capable of giving it renown and glory.
At Phocoea, Homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept
Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the
verses of the poet passing in his name. Having collected sufficient
poetry to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be-literary
publishers, neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him.
At his departure, Homer is said to have observed: "O Thestorides, of
the many things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is more
unintelligible than the human heart."Thestorides,
thnetoisin anoiston poleon per, ouden aphrastoteron peletai noou
anthropoisin. Ibid. p. 315. During his stay at Phocoea, Homer is said
to have composed the Little Iliad, and the Phocoeid. See Muller's Hist.
of Lit., vi. Section 3. Welcker, l. c. pp. 132, 272, 358, sqq.,
and Mure, Gr. Lit. vol. ii. p. 284, sq.
Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until some Chian
merchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard him
recite, acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing a
profitable livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This at
once determined him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to be
setting sail thither, but he found one ready to Start for Erythrae, a
town of Ionia, which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the
seamen to allow him to accompany them. Having embarked, he invoked a
favourable wind, and prayed that he might be able to expose the
imposture of Thestorides, who, by his breach of hospitality, had drawn
down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.
At Erythrae, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in
Phocoea, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty,
reached the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure,
which we will continue in the words of our author. "Having set out from
Pithys, Homer went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were
pasturing. The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus
(for that was the name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up
quickly, called off his dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For or
some time he stood wondering how a blind man should have reached such a
place alone, and what could be his design in coming. He then went up to
him, and inquired who he was, and how he had come to desolate places
and untrodden spots, and of what he stood in need. Homer, by recounting
to him the whole history of his misfortunes, moved him with compassion;
and he took him, and led him to his cot, and having lit a fire, bade
him sup.This is so pretty a picture of early manners and
hospitality, that it is almost a pity to find that it is obviously a
copy from the Odyssey. See the fourteenth book. In fact, whoever was
the author of this fictitious biography, he showed some tact in
identifying Homer with certain events described in his poems, and in
eliciting from them the germs of something like a personal narrative.
"The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according
to their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O
Glaucus, my friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs
their supper at the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since,
whilst they watch, nor thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.
Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author.
Having finished supper, they banquetedDia logon estionto. A
common metaphor. So Plato calls the parties conversing daitumones, or
estiatores. Tim. i. p. 522 A. Cf. Themist. Orat. vi. p. 168, and xvi.
p. 374, ed. Petav So diaegaemasi sophois omou kai terpnois aedio taen
Thoinaen tois hestiomenois epoiei, Choricius in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. T.
viii. P. 851. logois gar estia, Athenaeus vii p 275, A afresh on
conversation, Homer narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities
he had visited.
At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left
Homer at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus,
a place near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole
story respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to
what he said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and
feeding maimed and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the
stranger to him.
Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him,
assuring him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon
showed that the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general
knowledge, and the Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the
charge of his children.It was at Bolissus, and in the house
of this Chian citizen, that Homer is said to have written the
Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of the Frogs and Mice, the Epicichlidia,
and some other minor works.
Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of
Chios he established a school where he taught the precepts of poetry.
"To this day," says Chandler,Chandler, Travels,  vol. i. p.
61, referred to in the Voyage Pittoresque dans la Grece, vol. i. P. 92,
where a view of the spot is given of which the author candidly says,—
"Je ne puis repondre d'une exactitude scrupuleuse dans la vue generale
que j'en donne, car etant alle seul pour l'examiner je perdis mon
crayon, et je fus oblige de m'en fier a ma memoire. Je ne crois
cependant pas avoir trop a me plaindre d'elle en cette occasion." "the
most curious remain is that which has been named, without reason, the
School of Homer. It is on the coast, at some distance from the city,
northward, and appea