hat offended power
Latona's son a dire contagion spread,—Latona's son: i.e. Apollo.
And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
The king of men his reverent priest defied,—King of men: Agamemnon.
And for the king's offence the people died.


For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
His captive daughter from the victor's chain.
Suppliant the venerable father stands;
Apollo's awful ensigns grace his hands
By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
The brother-kings, of Atreus' royal race—Brother kings: Menelaus and Agamemnon.


"Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown'd,
And Troy's proud walls lie level with the ground.
May Jove restore you when your toils are o'er
Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
But, oh! relieve a wretched parent's pain,
And give Chryseis to these arms again;
If mercy fail, yet let my presents move,
And dread avenging Phoebus, son of Jove."


The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare,
The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,
Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied:


"Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,
Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains
Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.

Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;
And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;
Till time shall rifle every youthful grace,
And age dismiss her from my cold embrace,
In daily labours of the loom employ'd,
Or doom'd to deck the bed she once enjoy'd
Hence then; to Argos shall the maid retire,
Far from her native soil and weeping sire."



HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.
Illustration: HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.



The trembling priest along the shore return'd,
And in the anguish of a father mourn'd.
Disconsolate, not daring to complain,
Silent he wander'd by the sounding main;
Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays,
The god who darts around the world his rays.


"O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona's line,—Smintheus an epithet taken from sminthos, the Phrygian
name for a mouse, was applied to Apollo for having put an end to a
plague of mice which had harassed that territory. Strabo, however,
says, that when the Teucri were migrating from Crete, they were told by
an oracle to settle in that place, where they should not be attacked by
the original inhabitants of the land, and that, having halted for the
night, a number of field-mice came and gnawed away the leathern straps
of their baggage, and thongs of their armour. In fulfilment of the
oracle, they settled on the spot, and raised a temple to Sminthean
Apollo. Grote, "History of Greece," i. p. 68, remarks that the "worship
of Sminthean Apollo, in various parts of the Troad and its neighboring
territory, dates before the earliest period of Aeolian colonization."
Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,—Cilla, a town of Troas near Thebe, so called from
Cillus, a sister of Hippodamia, slain by OEnomaus.
Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores,
And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa's shores.

If e'er with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,A mistake. It should be,
"If e'er I roofed thy graceful fane,"
for the custom of decorating temples with garlands was of later date.
Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain;
God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ,
Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy."


Thus Chryses pray'd.—the favouring power attends,
And from Olympus' lofty tops descends.
Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;—Bent was his bow "The Apollo of Homer, it must be borne
in mind, is a different character from the deity of the same name
in the later classical pantheon. Throughout both poems, all deaths from
unforeseen or invisible causes, the ravages of pestilence, the fate of
the young child or promising adult, cut off in the germ of infancy or
flower of youth, of the old man dropping peacefully into the grave, or
of the reckless sinner suddenly checked in his career of crime, are
ascribed to the arrows of Apollo or Diana. The oracular functions of
the god rose naturally out of the above fundamental attributes, for who
could more appropriately impart to mortals what little foreknowledge
Fate permitted of her decrees than the agent of her most awful
dispensations? The close union of the arts of prophecy and song
explains his additional office of god of music, while the arrows with
which he and his sister were armed, symbols of sudden death in every
age, no less naturally procured him that of god of archery. Of any
connection between Apollo and the Sun, whatever may have existed in the
more esoteric doctrine of the Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace in
either Iliad or Odyssey."—Mure, "History of Greek Literature," vol. i.
p. 478, sq.
Fierce as he moved, his silver shafts resound.
Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread,
And gloomy darkness roll'd about his head.
The fleet in view, he twang'd his deadly bow,
And hissing fly the feather'd fates below.
On mules and dogs the infection first began;It has frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin
with animals, and that Homer had this fact in mind.
And last, the vengeful arrows fix'd in man.
For nine long nights, through all the dusky air,
The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal glare.
But ere the tenth revolving day was run,
Inspired by Juno, Thetis' godlike son
Convened to council all the Grecian train;
For much the goddess mourn'd her heroes slain.—Convened to council. The public assembly in the heroic
times is well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92. "It is an assembly
for talk. Communication and discussion to a certain extent by the
chiefs in person, of the people as listeners and sympathizers—often
for eloquence, and sometimes for quarrel—but here its ostensible
purposes end."
The assembly seated, rising o'er the rest,
Achilles thus the king of men address'd:


"Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,
And measure back the seas we cross'd before?
The plague destroying whom the sword would spare,
'Tis time to save the few remains of war.
But let some prophet, or some sacred sage,
Explore the cause of great Apollo's rage;
Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove
By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.Old Jacob Duport, whose "Gnomologia Homerica" is full of
curious and useful things, quotes several passages of the ancients, in
which reference is made to these words of Homer, in maintenance of the
belief that dreams had a divine origin and an import in which men were
interested.

If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore,
And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more."


He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;
Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
The past, the present, and the future knew:
Uprising slow, the venerable sage
Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age:


"Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would'st thou know
Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal bow?
First give thy faith, and plight a prince's word
Of sure protection, by thy power and sword:
For I must speak what wisdom would conceal,
And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,
Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise,
Instruct a monarch where his error lies;
For though we deem the short-lived fury past,
'Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last."
To whom Pelides:—"From thy inmost soul
Speak what thou know'st, and speak without control.
E'en by that god I swear who rules the day,
To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey.
And whose bless'd oracles thy lips declare;
Long as Achilles breathes this vital air,
No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,
Against his priest shall lift an impious hand;
Not e'en the chief by whom our hosts are led,
The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head."


Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies:
"Nor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,
But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest,
Apollo's vengeance for his injured priest.
Nor will the god's awaken'd fury cease,
But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.Rather, "bright-eyed." See the German critics quoted by
Arnold.
Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,
The priest may pardon, and the god may spare."


The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown
The monarch started from his shining throne;
Black choler fill'd his breast that boil'd with ire,
And from his eye-balls flash'd the living fire:
"Augur accursed! denouncing mischief still,
Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!
Still must that tongue some wounding message bring,
And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king?

For this are Phoebus' oracles explored,
To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord?
For this with falsehood is my honour stain'd,
Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned;
Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold,
And heavenly charms prefer to proffer'd gold?
A maid, unmatch'd in manners as in face,
Skill'd in each art, and crown'd with every grace;
Not half so dear were Clytaemnestra's charms,
When first her blooming beauties bless'd my arms.
Yet, if the gods demand her, let her sail;
Our cares are only for the public weal:
Let me be deem'd the hateful cause of all,
And suffer, rather than my people fall.
The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign,
So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
But since for common good I yield the fair,
My private loss let grateful Greece repair;
Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
That he alone has fought and bled in vain."
"Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies),
Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
Would'st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,
The due reward of many a well-fought field?


The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,
We share with justice, as with toil we gain;
But to resume whate'er thy avarice craves
(That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
Yet if our chief for plunder only fight,
The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,
Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers."


Then thus the king: "Shall I my prize resign
With tame content, and thou possess'd of thine?
Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,
Think not to rob me of a soldier's right.
At thy demand shall I restore the maid?
First let the just equivalent be paid;
Such as a king might ask; and let it be
A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
Or grant me this, or with a monarch's claim
This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;The prize given to Ajax was Tecmessa, while Ulysses received
Laodice, the daughter of Cycnus.
Ulysses' spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
But this when ti