rs to have been an open temple of Cybele, formed on
the top of a rock. The shape is oval, and in the centre is the image of
the goddess, the head and an arm wanting. She is represented, as usual,
sitting. The chair has a lion carved on each side, and on the back. The
area is bounded by a low rim, or seat, and about five yards over. The
whole is hewn out of the mountain, is rude, indistinct, and probably of
the most remote antiquity."
So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable
fortune. He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single,
the other married a Chian.
The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the
personages of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already
been mentioned:—
"In his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his
poem as the companion of Ulysses,A more probable reason for
this companionship, and for the character of Mentor itself, is given by
the allegorists, viz.: the assumption of Mentor's form by the guardian
deity of the wise Ulysses, Minerva. The classical reader may compare
Plutarch, Opp. t. ii. p. 880; Xyland. Heraclid. Pont. Alleg.
Hom. p. 531-5, of Gale's Opusc. Mythol. Dionys. Halic. de Hom. Poes. c.
15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s. f. in return for the care taken of him
when afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to
Phemius, who had given him both sustenance and instruction."
His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to
visit Greece, whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is
said, made some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity
of the Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no
mention,Vit. Hom. Section 28. he sent out for Samos. Here
being recognized by a Samian, who had met with him in Chios, he was
handsomely received, and invited to join in celebrating the Apaturian
festival. He recited some verses, which gave great satisfaction, and by
singing the Eiresione at the New Moon festivals, he earned a
subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich, with whose children he
was very popular.
In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios,
now Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his
death arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma
proposed by some fishermen's children.The riddle is given in
Section 35. Compare Mackenzie's note, p. xxx.
Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we
possess, and so broad are the evidences of its historical
worthlessness, that it is scarcely necessary to point them out in
detail. Let us now consider some of the opinions to which a
persevering, patient, and learned—but by no means consistent—series
of investigations has led. In doing so, I profess to bring forward
statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or probability.
"Homer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who
have done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The
majestic stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the
Nile, through many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the
Nile, its fountains will ever remain concealed."

Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German critics
has eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of the
Homeric question is involved. With no less truth and feeling he
proceeds:—
"It seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of
things makes possible. If the period of tradition in history is the
region of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light. The
creations of genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for
the most part, created far out of the reach of observation. If we were
in possession of all the historical testimonies, we never could wholly
explain the origin of the Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, in
all essential points, must have remained the secret of the poet."
Heeren's Ancient Greece, p. 96.
From this criticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of
human nature as into the minute wire-drawings of scholastic
investigation, let us pass on to the main question at issue. Was Homer
an individual?Compare Sir E. L. Bulwer's Caxtons v. i. p.
4. or were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an ingenious
arrangement of fragments by earlier poets?
Well has Landor remarked: "Some tell us there were twenty Homers; some
deny that there was ever one. It were idle and foolish to shake the
contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We are
perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our
devotion to superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least know
what is good for us. My opinion is, that what is best for us is our
admiration of good. No man living venerates Homer more than I do."
Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p.
387.
But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and
fostered, without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions
by minute analysis—our editorial office compels us to give some
attention to the doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric
question is beset, and to entreat our reader, for a brief period, to
prefer his judgment to his imagination, and to condescend to dry
details.
Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of
this unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must
express my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following
remarks:—
"We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the
better, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its
original composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that
its primitive integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to
assert, that the minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not
the best qualification for the profound feeling, the comprehensive
conception of an harmonious whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be
no judge of the symmetry of the human frame: and we would take the
opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general beauty
of a form, rather than that of Mr. Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

"There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines
of Pope.—

"'The critic eye—that microscope of wit
Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit,
How parts relate to parts, or they to whole
The body's harmony, the beaming soul,
Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
When man's whole frame is obvious to a flea.'"Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147.

Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning
the unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and
cautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation
of which I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.

"Origias, farewell! and oh! remember me
Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea,
A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,
And ask you, maid, of all the bards you boast,
Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most
Oh! answer all,—'A blind old man and poor
Sweetest he sings—and dwells on Chios' rocky shore.'"

See Thucyd. iii, 104. the authenticity of which has been already
disclaimed by modern critics. Longinus, in an oft quoted passage,
merely expressed an opinion touching the comparative inferiority of the
Odyssey to the Iliad,Longin., de Sublim., ix. Section 26.
Othen en tae Odysseia pareikasai tis an kataduomeno ton Omaeron haelio,
oo dixa taes sphodrotaetos paramenei to megethos and, among a mass of
ancient authors, whose very namesSee Tatian, quoted in
Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr. Mackenzie has given three brief but
elaborate papers on the different writers on the subject, which deserve
to be consulted. See Notes and Queries, vol. v. pp. 99, 171, and 221.
His own views are moderate, and perhaps as satisfactory, on the whole,
as any of the hypotheses hitherto put forth. In fact, they consist in
an attempt to blend those hypotheses into something like consistency,
rather than in advocating any individual theory. it would be tedious
to detail, no suspicion of the personal non-existence of Homer ever
arose. So far, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favour of our
early ideas on the subject; let us now see what are the discoveries to
which more modern investigations lay claim.
At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on
the subject, and we find Bentley remarking that "Homer wrote a sequel
of songs and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and
good cheer, at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs
were not collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about
Peisistratus' time, about five hundred years after."Letters
to Phileleuth; Lips.
Two French writers—Hedelin and Perrault—avowed a similar scepticism
on the subject; but it is in the "Scienza Nuova" of Battista Vico, that
we first meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by
Wolf with so much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the
Wolfian theory that we have chiefly to deal, and with the following
bold hypothesis, which we will detail in the words of GroteHist. of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq.—
"Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of
the Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by
no means the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously
announced by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent
portions of the Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into
any compact body and unchangeable order, until the days of
Peisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ. As a step towards
that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either poem
could be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which their
composition is referred; and that without writing, neither the perfect
symmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceived
by any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance to
posterity. The absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must be
indispensably supposed for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks,
was thus one of the points in Wolf's case against the primitive
integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch, and other leading
opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other seems to
have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been considered
incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of the
