






The Iliad of Homer
Translated by Alexander Pope
Homer
Alexander Pope


Edition 1


Project Gutenberg
September 2006
6130

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license











Library of Congress Classification













July 2004

Anne Soulard,
Juliet Sutherland,
Charles Franks, and
The Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Posted to Project Gutenberg


September 2006

Joshua Hutchinson

Converted to PGTEI v.04





    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htbp' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  










The Iliad of Homer
        Translated by Alexander Pope,
        with notes by the
        Rev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A.
        and
        Flaxman's Designs.
        1899


      Contents
      


      Illustrations
      





INTRODUCTION.

Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the
most part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very
gradual character of our education, we must continually forget, and
emancipate ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set
aside old notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be
daily unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and
anxiety to acquire.
And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu
of their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues
of sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as
powerful a touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy
scepticism of a temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of
conservatism, or the impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church.
History and tradition, whether of ancient or comparatively recent
times, are subjected to very different handling from that which the
indulgence or credulity of former ages could allow. Mere statements are
jealously watched, and the motives of the writer form as important an
ingredient in the analysis of his history, as the facts he records.
Probability is a powerful and troublesome test; and it is by this
troublesome standard that a large portion of historical evidence is
sifted. Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in its
demands. In brief, to write a history, we must know more than mere
facts. Human nature, viewed under an induction of extended experience,
is the best help to the criticism of human history. Historical
characters can only be estimated by the standard which human
experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished. To form
correct views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a
great whole—we must measure them by their relation to the mass of
beings by whom they are surrounded, and, in contemplating the incidents
in their lives or condition which tradition has handed down to us, we
must rather consider the general bearing of the whole narrative, than
the respective probability of its details.
It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know
least, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere"What," says Archdeacon Wilberforce, "is the natural root of loyalty as
distinguished from such mere selfish desire of personal security as is
apt to take its place in civilized times, but that consciousness of a
natural bond among the families of men which gives a fellow-feeling to
whole clans and nations, and thus enlists their affections in behalf of
those time-honoured representatives of their ancient blood, in whose
success they feel a personal interest? Hence the delight when we
recognize an act of nobility or justice in our hereditary princes

"'Tuque prior, tu parce genus qui ducis Olympo,
Projice tela manu sanguis meus'

"So strong is this feeling, that it regains an engrafted influence even
when history witnesses that vast convulsions have rent and weakened it
and the Celtic feeling towards the Stuarts has been rekindled in our
own days towards the grand daughter of George the Third of Hanover.
"Somewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to idolize those great
lawgivers of man's race, who have given expression, in the immortal
language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our nature. The
thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal inheritance of the
human race. In this mutual ground every man meets his brother, they
have been bet forth by the providence of God to vindicate for all of us
what nature could effect, and that, in these representatives of our
race, we might recognize our common benefactors.'—Doctrine of the
Incarnation, pp. 9, 10. have, perhaps, contributed more to the
intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any other three writers who
could be named, and yet the history of all three has given rise to a
boundless ocean of discussion, which has left us little save the option
of choosing which theory or theories we will follow. The personality of
Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in which critics will allow us
to believe without controversy; but upon everything else, even down to
the authorship of plays, there is more or less of doubt and
uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as little as the contradictions of
Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was one of the dramatis
personae in two dramas as unlike in principles as in style. He
appears as the enunciator of opinions as different in their tone as
those of the writers who have handed them down. When we have read Plato
or Xenophon, we think we know something of Socrates; when we
have fairly read and examined both, we feel convinced that we are
something worse than ignorant.
It has been an easy, and a popular expedient, of late years, to deny
the personal or real existence of men and things whose life and
condition were too much for our belief. This system—which has often
comforted the religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of
Strauss for those of the New Testament—has been of incalculable value
to the historical theorists of the last and present centuries. To
question the existence of Alexander the Great, would be a more
excusable act, than to believe in that of Romulus. To deny a fact
related in Herodotus, because it is inconsistent with a theory
developed from an Assyrian inscription which no two scholars read in
the same way, is more pardonable, than to believe in the good-natured
old king whom the elegant pen of Florian has idealized—Numa
Pompilius.
Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer,
and the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free
permission to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard all
written tradition, concerning the author or authors of the Iliad and
Odyssey. What few authorities exist on the subject, are summarily
dismissed, although the arguments appear to run in a circle. "This
cannot be true, because it is not true; and, that is not true, because
it cannot be true." Such seems to be the style, in which testimony upon
testimony, statement upon statement, is consigned to denial and
oblivion.
It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of
the Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken
of the treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to
Herodotus.
According to this document, the city of Cumae in Æolia, was, at an
early period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of
Greece. Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes.
Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl named
Critheis. The girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the
guardianship of Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this
maiden that we "are indebted for so much happiness." Homer was the
first fruit of her juvenile frailty, and received the name of
Melesigenes, from having been born near the river Meles, in Boeotia,
whither Critheis had been transported in order to save her reputation.
"At this time," continues our narrative, "there lived at Smyrna a man
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being
married, engaged Critheis to manage his household, and spin the flax he
received as the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was
her performance of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made
proposals of marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement,
willing to adopt her son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man,
if he were carefully brought up."
They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon
followed. Melesigenes carried on his adopted father's school with great
success, exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna,
but also of the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially
in the exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these
visitors, one Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who
evinced a knowledge and intelligence rarely found in those times,
persuaded Melesigenes to close his school, and accompany him on his
travels. He promised not only to pay his expenses, but to furnish him
with a further stipend, urging, that, "While he was yet young, it was
fitting that he should see with his own eyes the countries and cities
which might hereafter be the subjects of his discourses." Melesigenes
consented, and set out with his patron, "examining all the curiosities
of the countries they visited, and informing himself of everything by
interrogating those whom he met." We may also suppose, that he wrote
memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of preservationEikos
de min aen kai mnaemoruna panton grapherthai. Vit. Hom. in Schweigh
Herodot t. iv. p. 299, sq. Section 6. I may observe that this Life has
been paraphrased in English by my learned young friend K