exed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among the
heroes of her age, however Mr. Knight may have failed in reducing the
Homeric language to its primitive form; however, finally, the Attic
dialect may not have assumed all its more marked and distinguishing
characteristics—still it is difficult to suppose that the language,
particularly in the joinings and transitions, and connecting parts,
should not more clearly betray the incongruity between the more ancient
and modern forms of expression. It is not quite in character with such
a period to imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an
imperfect poem in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott
has done in his continuation of Sir Tristram.
"If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of Athenian
compilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the total
absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy of
observation. In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times,
the Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of their
ancestors. But, amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greece
embodied in the Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and
insignificant part. Even the few passages which relate to their
ancestors, Mr. Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible,
indeed, that in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic
fact, that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the chieftain
of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his forces, may have
been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian sovereign; the preeminent
value of the ancient poetry on the Trojan war may thus have
forced the national feeling of the Athenians to yield to their taste.
The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no doubt, of
far inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid
would have been much more likely to have emanated from an Athenian
synod of compilers of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid.
Could France have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the
hero of the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all its
direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the poetic
cycle, as to admit no rivalry,—it is still surprising, that throughout
the whole poem the callida junctura should never betray the
workmanship of an Athenian hand, and that the national spirit of a
race, who have at a later period not inaptly been compared to our self
admiring neighbours, the French, should submit with lofty self denial
to the almost total exclusion of their own ancestors—or, at least, to
the questionable dignity of only having produced a leader tolerably
skilled in the military tactics of his age."Quarterly
Review, l. c., p. 131 sq.

To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that
Wolf's objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey
have never been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they
have failed to enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the
difficulties with which the whole subject is beset, are rather
augmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis. Nor is Lachmann'sBetrachtungen uber die Ilias. Berol. 1841. See Grote, p.
204. Notes and Queries, vol. v. p. 221. modification of his theory
any better. He divides the first twenty-two books of the Iliad into
sixteen different songs, and treats as ridiculous the belief that their
amalgamation into one regular poem belongs to a period earlier than the
age of Peisistratus. This, as Grote observes, "explains the gaps and
contradictions in the narrative, but it explains nothing else."
Moreover, we find no contradictions warranting this belief, and the so-called
sixteen poets concur in getting rid of the following leading men
in the first battle after the secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of
the Euboeans; Tlepolemus, of the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians;
Odius, of the Halizonians; Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of
these heroes again make their appearance, and we can but agree with
Colonel Mure, that "it seems strange that any number of independent
poets should have so harmoniously dispensed with the services of all
six in the sequel." The discrepancy, by which Pylaemenes, who is
represented as dead in the fifth book, weeps at his son's funeral in
the thirteenth, can only be regarded as the result of an interpolation.
Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmann's modifications with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success,
that the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems,
or, supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by
Peisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct. In
short, "a man may believe the Iliad to have been put together out of
pre-existing songs, without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the
period of its first compilation." The friends or literary
employes of Peisistratus must have found an Iliad that was
already ancient, and the silence of the Alexandrine critics respecting
the Peisistratic "recension," goes far to prove, that, among the
numerous manuscripts they examined, this was either wanting, or thought
unworthy of attention.
"Moreover," he continues, "the whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad
or Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age
of Peisistratus—nothing which brings to our view the alterations
brought about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined
money, the habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican
governments, the close military array, the improved construction of
ships, the Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of
religious festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c.,
familiar to the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the
other literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to
notice, even without design, had they then, for the first time,
undertaken the task of piecing together many self existent epics into
one large aggregate. Everything in the two great Homeric poems, both in
substance and in language, belongs to an age two or three centuries
earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the interpolations (or those
passages which, on the best grounds, are pronounced to be such) betray
no trace of the sixth century before Christ, and may well have been
heard by Archilochus and Kallinus—in some cases even by Arktinus and
Hesiod—as genuine Homeric matterProlegg. pp. xxxii.,
xxxvi., &c. As far as the evidences on the case, as well internal as
external, enable us to judge, we seem warranted in believing that the
Iliad and Odyssey were recited substantially as they now stand (always
allowing for paitial divergences of text and interpolations) in 776
B.C., our first trustworthy mark of Grecian time; and this ancient
date, let it be added, as it is the best-authenticated fact, so it is
also the most important attribute of the Homeric poems, considered in
reference to Grecian history; for they thus afford us an insight into
the anti-historical character of the Greeks, enabling us to trace the
subsequent forward march of the nation, and to seize instructive
contrasts between their former and their later condition."Vol. ii. p. 214 sqq.
On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of
Peisistratus were wholly of an editorial character, although, I must
confess, that I can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his
labours. At the same time, so far from believing that the composition
or primary arrangement of these poems, in their present form, was the
work of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste and
elegant mind of that Athenian"Who," says Cicero, de Orat.
iii. 34, "was more learned in that age, or whose eloquence is reported
to have been more perfected by literature than that of Peisistratus,
who is said first to have disposed the books of Homer in the order in
which we now have them?" Compare Wolf's Prolegomena, Section 33 would
lead him to preserve an ancient and traditional order of the poems,
rather than to patch and re-construct them according to a fanciful
hypothesis. I will not repeat the many discussions respecting whether
the poems were written or not, or whether the art of writing was known
in the time of their reputed author. Suffice it to say, that the more
we read, the less satisfied we are upon either subject.

I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version
of the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical
probability must be measured by that of many others relating to the
Spartan Confucius.
I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt,
made by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like
consistency. It is as follows:—

"No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common sailors
of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to 'discourse in excellent
music' among them. Many of these, like those of the negroes in the
United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events passing
around them. But what was passing around them? The grand events of a
spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as the
mystical legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besides
which, a retentive memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, and
was cultivated accordingly in those ancient times. Ballads at first,
and down to the beginning of the war with Troy, were merely
recitations, with an intonation. Then followed a species of recitative,
probably with an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the
memory considerably.
"It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war, that a
poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Moeonides, but most
probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be made of great
utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position of
Hellas, and, as a collection, he published these lays, connecting them
by a tale of his own. This poem now exists, under the title of the
'Odyssea.' The author, however, did not affix his own name to the poem,
which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled from the archaic
dialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him. He
therefore called it the poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is
rather a proof of his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging
arra