Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from the
beginning.
"To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that
view of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to
controvert it, we were driven to the necessity of admitting long
written poems, in the ninth century before the Christian aera. Few
things, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight,
opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less than
Wolf himself. The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventh
century before the Christian aera, are exceedingly trifling. We have no
remaining inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the early
inscriptions are rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assure
ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonides of Amorgus, Kallinus,
Tyrtaeus, Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and lyric poets,
committed their compositions to writing, or at what time the practice
of doing so became familiar. The first positive ground which authorizes
us to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the famous
ordinance of Solon, with regard to the rhapsodies at the Panathenaea:
but for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we are
unable to say.
"Those who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the
existing habits of society with regard to poetry—for they admit
generally that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and
heard,—but upon the supposed necessity that there must have been
manuscripts to ensure the preservation of the poems—the unassisted
memory of reciters being neither sufficient nor trustworthy. But here
we only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for the
existence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory,
It is, indeed not easy to calculate the height to which the
memory may be cultivated. To take an ordinary case, we might refer to
that of any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short
warning, to 'rhapsodize,' night after night, parts which when laid
together, would amount to an immense number of lines. But all this is
nothing to two instances of our own day. Visiting at Naples a gentleman
of the highest intellectual attainments, and who held a distinguished
rank among the men of letters in the last century, he informed us that
the day before he had passed much time in examining a man, not highly
educated, who had learned to repeat the whole Gierusalemme of Tasso,
not only to recite it consecutively, but also to repeat those stanzas
in utter defiance of the sense, either forwards or backwards, or from
the eighth line to the first, alternately the odd and even lines—in
short, whatever the passage required; the memory, which seemed to cling
to the words much more than to the sense, had it at such perfect
command, that it could produce it under any form. Our informant went on
to state that this singular being was proceeding to learn the Orlando
Furioso in the same manner. But even this instance is less wonderful
than one as to which we may appeal to any of our readers that happened
some twenty years ago to visit the town of Stirling, in Scotland. No
such person can have forgotten the poor, uneducated man Blind Jamie who
could actually repeat, after a few minutes consideration any verse
required from any part of the Bible—even the obscurest and most
unimportant enumeration of mere proper names not excepted. We do not
mention these facts as touching the more difficult part of the question
before us, but facts they are; and if we find so much difficulty in
calculating the extent to which the mere memory may be cultivated, are
we, in these days of multifarious reading, and of countless distracting
affairs, fair judges of the perfection to which the invention and the
memory combined may attain in a simpler age, and among a more single
minded people?—Quarterly Review, l. c., p. 143, sqq.
Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, "The
Dschungariade of the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer in
length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit, and yet it exists
only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted with writing.
But the songs of a nation are probably the last things which are
committed to writing, for the very reason that they are remembered."—
Ancient Greece. p. 100. is far less astonishing than that of
long manuscripts, in an age essentially non-reading and non-writing,
and when even suitable instruments and materials for the process are
not obvious. Moreover, there is a strong positive reason for believing
that the bard was under no necessity of refreshing his memory by
consulting a manuscript; for if such had been the fact, blindness would
have been a disqualification for the profession, which we know that it
was not, as well from the example of Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from
that of the blind bard of Chios, in the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom
Thucydides, as well as the general tenor of Grecian legend, identifies
with Homer himself. The author of that hymn, be he who he may, could
never have described a blind man as attaining the utmost perfection in
his art, if he had been conscious that the memory of the bard was only
maintained by constant reference to the manuscript in his chest."
The loss of the digamma, that crux of critics, that quicksand
upon which even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove
beyond a doubt, that the pronunciation of the Greek language had
undergone a considerable change. Now it is certainly difficult to
suppose that the Homeric poems could have suffered by this change, had
written copies been preserved. If Chaucer's poetry, for instance, had
not been written, it could only have come down to us in a softened
form, more like the effeminate version of Dryden, than the rough,
quaint, noble original.
"At what period," continues Grote, "these poems, or indeed any other
Greek poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture,
though there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of
Solon. If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any
more determinate period, the question a once suggests itself, What were
the purposes which, in that state of society, a manuscript at its first
commencement must have been intended to answer? For whom was a written
Iliad necessary? Not for the rhapsodes; for with them it was not only
planted in the memory, but also interwoven with the feelings, and
conceived in conjunction with all those flexions and intonations of
voice, pauses, and other oral artifices which were required for
emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could never
reproduce. Not for the general public—they were accustomed to receive
it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a solemn
and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad would
be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class of
readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed.
If we could discover at what time such a class first began to be
formed, we should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic
poems were first committed to writing. Now the period which may with
the greatest probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the
formation even of the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle
of the seventh century before the Christian aera (B.C. 660 to B.C.
630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simonides of
Amorgus, &c. I ground this supposition on the change then operated in
the character and tendencies of Grecian poetry and music—the elegiac
and the iambic measures having been introduced as rivals to the
primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions having been transferred
from the epical past to the affairs of present and real life. Such a
change was important at a time when poetry was the only known mode of
publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable, yet the
nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking at
the old epical treasures of the people as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it, may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric
rhapsodies, just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and
eulogized the Thebais as the production of Homer. There seems,
therefore, ground for conjecturing that (for the use of this newly-formed
and important, but very narrow class), manuscripts of the
Homeric poems and other old epics,—the Thebais and the Cypria, as well
as the Iliad and the Odyssey,—began to be compiled towards the middle
of the seventh century (B.C. 1); and the opening of Egypt to Grecian
commerce, which took place about the same period, would furnish
increased facilities for obtaining the requisite papyrus to write upon.
A reading class, when once formed, would doubtless slowly increase, and
the number of manuscripts along with it; so that before the time of
Solon, fifty years afterwards, both readers and manuscripts, though
still comparatively few, might have attained a certain recognized
authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against the carelessness
of individual rhapsodes."Vol. II p. 198, sqq.
But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of
the credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following
observations—

"There are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion,
throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid
compilation, at least over the theory, that the Iliad was cast into its
present stately and harmonious form by the directions of the Athenian
ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the bright period of
Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited little more than the
fame, and the faint echo, if Stesichorus, Anacreon, and Simonides were
employed in the noble task of compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much
must have been done to arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is
almost incredible, that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should
not remain. Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies
which no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the
Homeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may have
perpl