iron
anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and Vulcan, attempting
to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in the manner described.
The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep explanations for this
amusing fiction. See Heraclides, 'Ponticus," p. 463 sq., ed Gale. The
story is told by Homer himself in Book xv. The Sinthians were a race of
robbers, the ancient inhabitants of Lemnos which island was ever after
sacred to Vulcan.

"Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece, and in Ausonian land
Men call'd him Mulciber, and how he fell
From heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer o'er the crystal battlements from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summer's day and with the setting sun
Dropp'd from the zenith like a falling star
On Lemnos, th' Aegean isle thus they relate."

"Paradise Lost," i. 738


He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved,
Which, with a smile, the white-arm'd queen received
Then, to the rest he fill'd; and in his turn,
Each to his lips applied the nectar'd urn,
Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies,
And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the skies.


Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong,
In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.It is ingeniously observed by Grote, vol i p. 463, that "The
gods formed a sort of political community of their own which had its
hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and duties, its contentions for
power and occasional revolutions, its public meetings in the agora
of Olympus, and its multitudinous banquets or festivals."
Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round
With voice alternate aid the silver sound.

Meantime the radiant sun to mortal sight
Descending swift, roll'd down the rapid light:
Then to their starry domes the gods depart,
The shining monuments of Vulcan's art:
Jove on his couch reclined his awful head,
And Juno slumber'd on the golden bed.



JUPITER.
Illustration: JUPITER.





THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.
Illustration: THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.







BOOK II.

ARGUMENT.
THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY, AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES.
Jupiter, in pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitful
vision to Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the army to battle, in
order to make the Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles. The
general, who is deluded with the hopes of taking Troy without his
assistance, but fears the army was discouraged by his absence, and the
late plague, as well as by the length of time, contrives to make trial
of their disposition by a stratagem. He first communicates his design
to the princes in council, that he would propose a return to the
soldiers, and that they should put a stop to them if the proposal
was embraced. Then he assembles the whole host, and upon moving for a
return to Greece, they unanimously agree to it, and run to prepare the
ships. They are detained by the management of Ulysses, who chastises
the insolence of Thersites. The assembly is recalled, several speeches
made on the occasion, and at length the advice of Nestor followed,
which was to make a general muster of the troops, and to divide them
into their several nations, before they proceeded to battle. This gives
occasion to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the Greeks and
Trojans, and in a large catalogue.
The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day. The
scene lies in the Grecian camp, and upon the sea-shore; towards the end
it removes to Troy.

Now pleasing sleep had seal'd each mortal eye,
Stretch'd in the tents the Grecian leaders lie:
The immortals slumber'd on their thrones above;
All, but the ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.Plato, Rep. iii. p. 437, was so scandalized at this
deception of Jupiter's, and at his other attacks on the character of
the gods, that he would fain sentence him to an honourable banishment.
(See Minucius Felix, Section 22.) Coleridge, Introd. p. 154, well
observes, that the supreme father of gods and men had a full right to
employ a lying spirit to work out his ultimate will. Compare "Paradise
Lost," v. 646:

"And roseate dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest."

To honour Thetis' son he bends his care,
And plunge the Greeks in all the woes of war:
Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight,
And thus commands the vision of the night.


"Fly hence, deluding Dream! and light as air,—Dream ought to be spelt with a capital letter, being,
I think, evidently personified as the god of dreams. See Anthon and
others.

"When, by Minerva sent, a fraudful Dream
Rush'd from the skies, the bane of her and Troy."

Dyce's "Select Translations from Quintus Calaber," p.10.
To Agamemnon's ample tent repair.

Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train,
Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.
Declare, e'en now 'tis given him to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall."


Swift as the word the vain illusion fled,
Descends, and hovers o'er Atrides' head;
Clothed in the figure of the Pylian sage,
Renown'd for wisdom, and revered for age:
Around his temples spreads his golden wing,
And thus the flattering dream deceives the king.



JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.
Illustration: JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.



"Canst thou, with all a monarch's cares oppress'd,
O Atreus' son! canst thou indulge the rest?
"Sleep'st thou, companion dear, what sleep can close
Thy eye-lids?"

—"Paradise Lost," v. 673.
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
Directs in council, and in war presides,
To whom its safety a whole people owes,
To waste long nights in indolent repose.This truly military sentiment has been echoed by the
approving voice of many a general and statesman of antiquity. See
Pliny's Panegyric on Trajan. Silius neatly translates it,
"Turpe duci totam somno consumere noctem."
Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear;
Thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care.
In just array draw forth the embattled train,
Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;

E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.
Awake, but waking this advice approve,
And trust the vision that descends from Jove."


The phantom said; then vanish'd from his sight,
Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.
A thousand schemes the monarch's mind employ;
Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy:
Vain as he was, and to the future blind,
Nor saw what Jove and secret fate design'd,
What mighty toils to either host remain,
What scenes of grief, and numbers of the slain!
Eager he rises, and in fancy hears
The voice celestial murmuring in his ears.
First on his limbs a slender vest he drew,
Around him next the regal mantle threw,
The embroider'd sandals on his feet were tied;
The starry falchion glitter'd at his side;
And last, his arm the massy sceptre loads,
Unstain'd, immortal, and the gift of gods.


Now rosy Morn ascends the court of Jove,
Lifts up her light, and opens day above.
The king despatch'd his heralds with commands
To range the camp and summon all the bands:
The gathering hosts the monarch's word obey;
While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.
In his black ship the Pylian prince he found;
There calls a senate of the peers around:
The assembly placed, the king of men express'd
The counsels labouring in his artful breast.


"Friends and confederates! with attentive ear
Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
Late as I slumber'd in the shades of night,
A dream divine appear'd before my sight;
Whose visionary form like Nestor came,
The same in habit, and in mien the same.—The same in habit, &c.

"To whom once more the winged god appears;
His former youthful mien and shape he wears."

Dryden's Virgil, iv. 803.
The heavenly phantom hover'd o'er my head,
'And, dost thou sleep, O Atreus' son? (he said)
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
Directs in council, and in war presides;
To whom its safety a whole people owes,
To waste long nights in indolent repose.

Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear,
Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
In just array draw forth the embattled train,
And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;
E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.


This hear observant, and the gods obey!'
The vision spoke, and pass'd in air away.
Now, valiant chiefs! since heaven itself alarms,
Unite, and rouse the sons of Greece to arms.
But first, with caution, try what yet they dare,
Worn with nine years of unsuccessful war.
To move the troops to measure back the main,
Be mine; and yours the province to detain."


He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said,
(Nestor, whom Pylos' sandy realms obey'd,)
"Princes of Greece, your faithful ears incline,
Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine;
Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host,
Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!
Then let us haste, obey the god's alarms,
And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms."


Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay
Dissolve the council, and their chief obey:
The sceptred rulers lead; the following host,
Pour'd forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.
As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees
Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees,
Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,
With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms;
Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,
And o'er the vale descends the living cloud.
"As bees in spring-time, when
The sun with Taurus rides,
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
The suburb of this straw-built citadel,
New-nibb'd with balm, expatiate and confer
Their state affairs. So thick the very crowd
Swarm'd and were straiten'd."—"Paradise Lost" i. 768.

So, from the tents and ships, a lengthen'd train
Spreads all the beach, and wide o'ershades the plain:
Along the region runs a deafening sound;
Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground.
Fame flies before the messenger of Jove,
And shining soars, and claps her wings above.

Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loudIt was the herald's duty to make the people sit down. "A
standing agora is a symptom of manifest terror (II. Xviii. 246)
an evening agora, to which men came elevated by wine, is also the
forerunner of mischief ('Odyssey,' iii. 138)."—Grote, ii. p. 91,
note.
The monarch's will, suspend the listening crowd.
Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear,
And fainter murmurs died upon the ear,
The king of king