 like the old heroes of that make, commit
something near extravagance, amidst a series of glorious and inimitable
performances. Thus Homer has his "speaking horses;" and Virgil his
"myrtles distilling blood;" where the latter has not so much as
contrived the easy intervention of a deity to save the probability.
It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have been
thought too exuberant and full of circumstances. The force of this
faculty is seen in nothing more, than in its inability to confine
itself to that single circumstance upon which the comparison is
grounded: it runs out into embellishments of additional images, which,
however, are so managed as not to overpower the main one. His similes
are like pictures, where the principal figure has not only its
proportion given agreeable to the original, but is also set off with
occasional ornaments and prospects. The same will account for his
manner of heaping a number of comparisons together in one breath, when
his fancy suggested to him at once so many various and correspondent
images. The reader will easily extend this observation to more
objections of the same kind.
If there are others which seem rather to charge him with a defect or
narrowness of genius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects will
be found upon examination to proceed wholly from the nature of the
times he lived in. Such are his grosser representations of the gods;
and the vicious and imperfect manners of his heroes; but I must here
speak a word of the latter, as it is a point generally carried into
extremes, both by the censurers and defenders of Homer. It must be a
strange partiality to antiquity, to think with Madame Dacier,Preface to her Homer.
"that those times and manners are so
much the more excellent, as they are more contrary to ours." Who can be
so prejudiced in their favour as to magnify the felicity of those ages,
when a spirit of revenge and cruelty, joined with the practice of
rapine and robbery, reigned through the world: when no mercy was shown
but for the sake of lucre; when the greatest princes were put to the
sword, and their wives and daughters made slaves and concubines? On the
other side, I would not be so delicate as those modern critics, who are
shocked at the servile offices and mean employments in which we
sometimes see the heroes of Homer engaged. There is a pleasure in
taking a view of that simplicity, in opposition to the luxury of
succeeding ages: in beholding monarchs without their guards; princes
tending their flocks, and princesses drawing water from the springs.
When we read Homer, we ought to reflect that we are reading the most
ancient author in the heathen world; and those who consider him in this
light, will double their pleasure in the perusal of him. Let them think
they are growing acquainted with nations and people that are now no
more; that they are stepping almost three thousand years back into the
remotest antiquity, and entertaining themselves with a clear and
surprising vision of things nowhere else to be found, the only true
mirror of that ancient world. By this means alone their greatest
obstacles will vanish; and what usually creates their dislike, will
become a satisfaction.
This consideration may further serve to answer for the constant use of
the same epithets to his gods and heroes; such as the "far-darting
Phoebus," the "blue-eyed Pallas," the "swift-footed Achilles," &c.,
which some have censured as impertinent, and tediously repeated. Those
of the gods depended upon the powers and offices then believed to
belong to them; and had contracted a weight and veneration from the
rites and solemn devotions in which they were used: they were a sort of
attributes with which it was a matter of religion to salute them on all
occasions, and which it was an irreverence to omit. As for the epithets
of great men, Mons. Boileau is of opinion, that they were in the nature
of surnames, and repeated as such; for the Greeks having no names
derived from their fathers, were obliged to add some other distinction
of each person; either naming his parents expressly, or his place of
birth, profession, or the like: as Alexander the son of Philip,
Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic, &c. Homer, therefore,
complying with the custom of his country, used such distinctive
additions as better agreed with poetry. And, indeed, we have something
parallel to these in modern times, such as the names of Harold
Harefoot, Edmund Ironside, Edward Longshanks, Edward the Black Prince,
&c. If yet this be thought to account better for the propriety than for
the repetition, I shall add a further conjecture. Hesiod, dividing the
world into its different ages, has placed a fourth age, between the
brazen and the iron one, of "heroes distinct from other men; a divine
race who fought at Thebes and Troy, are called demi-gods, and live by
the care of Jupiter in the islands of the blessed." Now among the
divine honours which were paid them, they might have this also in
common with the gods, not to be mentioned without the solemnity of an
epithet, and such as might be acceptable to them by celebrating their
families, actions or qualities.
What other cavils have been raised against Homer, are such as hardly
deserve a reply, but will yet be taken notice of as they occur in the
course of the work. Many have been occasioned by an injudicious
endeavour to exalt Virgil; which is much the same, as if one should
think to raise the superstructure by undermining the foundation: one
would imagine, by the whole course of their parallels, that these
critics never so much as heard of Homer's having written first; a
consideration which whoever compares these two poets ought to have
always in his eye. Some accuse him for the same things which they
overlook or praise in the other; as when they prefer the fable and
moral of the Æneis to those of the Iliad, for the same reasons which
might set the Odyssey above the Æneis; as that the hero is a wiser
man, and the action of the one more beneficial to his country than that
of the other; or else they blame him for not doing what he never
designed; as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a prince as
Æneas, when the very moral of his poem required a contrary character:
it is thus that Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil.
Others select those particular passages of Homer which are not so
laboured as some that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole
management of Scaliger in his Poetics. Others quarrel with what they
take for low and mean expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy
and refinement, oftener from an ignorance of the graces of the
original, and then triumph in the awkwardness of their own
translations: this is the conduct of Perrault in his Parallels. Lastly,
there are others, who, pretending to a fairer proceeding, distinguish
between the personal merit of Homer, and that of his work; but when
they come to assign the causes of the great reputation of the Iliad,
they found it upon the ignorance of his times, and the prejudice of
those that followed: and in pursuance of this principle, they make
those accidents (such as the contention of the cities, &c.) to be the
causes of his fame, which were in reality the consequences of his
merit. The same might as well be said of Virgil, or any great author
whose general character will infallibly raise many casual additions to
their reputation. This is the method of Mons. de la Mott; who yet
confesses upon the whole that in whatever age Homer had lived, he must
have been the greatest poet of his nation, and that he may be said in
his sense to be the master even of those who surpassed him.Hesiod. Opp. et Dier. Lib. I. vers. 155, &c.
In all these objections we see nothing that contradicts his title to
the honour of the chief invention: and as long as this (which is indeed
the characteristic of poetry itself) remains unequalled by his
followers, he still continues superior to them. A cooler judgment may
commit fewer faults, and be more approved in the eyes of one sort of
critics: but that warmth of fancy will carry the loudest and most
universal applauses which holds the heart of a reader under the
strongest enchantment. Homer not only appears the inventor of poetry,
but excels all the inventors of other arts, in this, that he has
swallowed up the honour of those who succeeded him. What he has done
admitted no increase, it only left room for contraction or regulation.
He showed all the stretch of fancy at once; and if he has failed in
some of his flights, it was but because he attempted everything. A work
of this kind seems like a mighty tree, which rises from the most
vigorous seed, is improved with industry, flourishes, and produces the
finest fruit: nature and art conspire to raise it; pleasure and profit
join to make it valuable: and they who find the justest faults, have
only said that a few branches which run luxuriant through a richness of
nature, might be lopped into form to give it a more regular appearance.
Having now spoken of the beauties and defects of the original, it
remains to treat of the translation, with the same view to the chief
characteristic. As far as that is seen in the main parts of the poem,
such as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudice
it but by wilful omissions or contractions. As it also breaks out in
every particular image, description, and simile, whoever lessens or too
much softens those, takes off from this chief character. It is the
first grand duty of an interpreter to give his author entire and
unmaimed; and for the rest, the diction and versification only are his
proper province, since these must be his own, but the others he is to
take as he finds them.
It should then be considered what methods may afford some equivalent in
our language for the graces of these in the Greek. It is certain no
literal translation can be just to an excellent original in a superior
language: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have done) that
a rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect; which is no
less in danger to lose the spirit of an ancient, by deviating into the
modern manners of expression. If there be sometimes a darkness, there
is often a light in antiquity, which nothing better preserves than a
version almost literal. I know no liberties one ought to take, but
those which are necessary to transfusing the spirit of the original,
and supporting the poetical style of the translation: and I will
venture to say, there have not been more men misled in former times by
a servile, dull adherence to the letter, than have been deluded in ours
by a chimerical, insolent hope of raising and improving their author.
It is not to be doubted, that the fire of the poem is what a translator
should principally regard, as it is most likely to expire in his
managing: however, it is his safest way to be content with preserving
this to his