TRANSFIGURATIONS  OF  METAMORPHOSIS 

TRADITIONS  IN  THE  ACTS  OF  JOHN, 

THOMAS,  AND  PETER 

David  R.  Cartlidge 

Abstract 

The  apocryphal  Acts  of  John,  Peter,  and  Thomas  employ 
traditions of Jesus transfigured  at crucial points in their narratives. 
Each  of the  Acts presents  the  metamorphosis  stories  in the  con(cid:173)
text  of  a  pattern  which  likely  precedes  the  earliest  literary  ac(cid:173)
counts  of  Jesus'  transfiguration  (i.e.,  Mk  9:2-8  and  parallels). 
However,  the  Acts  present  these  stories  and  the  polymorphic 
christology which accompanaeis them with significant  theological 
diversity.  We have,  then,  examples  of the  theological  differences 
among  the  Acts  in  their  diverse  use  of cognate  traditions  and of 
the Acts' employment  of them. 

0.  Three  of  the  AAA,  namely,  the  AJn,  the  APt,  and  the  ATh,  contain 
scenes  in  which  Jesus  assumes  diverse  shapes  when  he  appears  to  the 
faithful.  These  scenes  are formally  and  conceptually  analogous  to  the  so-
called  transfiguration  story  in  the  synoptic  gospels  (Mk  9:2-8  and  paral(cid:173)
lels). 

1.  The  Acts  of  John 

In chs.  87-105 of the  AJn are  several examples  of the  metamorphosis 
motif.  Study  of  the  section  is  hindered  by  the  corrupt  state  of  the  text. 
Further,  AJn  87-105  appears  in  only  one  manuscript  (Codex  Vindoben-
sis),  which  contains  only  this  section.  (A few fragments  also appear  in  the 
Acts  of the  Council  of 787  [Lipsius  and  Bonnet:  2.1. xxxi,  Hennecke  and 
Schneemelcher:  194-196].)  To  find  the  proper  literary  setting for  87-105 
in  the  whole  of  the  AJn  is  akin  to  installing  a  gear  in  an  unfamiliar 
machine  without  an  instruction  manual  and  without  several  essential 
parts. 

54 

Semeia 

The  narrative  of 87-105  begins  with  Drusiana's  report  that  the  Lord 
appeared  to her  "in  the form  (morphê)  of John and in that of a youth" (87). 
The  implied  polymorphism  of Jesus  in  this  tale— morphê  denotes  both  a 
change  of shape  and  of essence  (cf  82,  88, 89, 98, and  100)—has created  a 
crisis  of faith  in  the  community.  To calm  this  disturbance  John  sets  about 
to  "firm  up" (bebaios)  their  faith  (97). 

At the  outset  of this  "firming-up"  speech,  John  rejects  the  customary 
written  and  oral  tradition  about  Jesus  (88).  Further,  John  says,  he  will 
explain  to  the  congregation  the  correct  doctrine  in  a way  that  will  insure 
that  those who  are  not  yet  ready for  the  deepest  meanings  of the faith  can 
understand  (88),  that  is,  so that  they  "may  understand  the  doksa  around 
Jesus"  (88).  Doksa  here  seems  to  denote  a glory which  hides  the  essence 
of the  savior.  The  tales of  Jesus' shape-changing  are doksai  in the AJn (93). 
Johns  sermon  is  an  extended  prose  narrative  of  the  redeemer's 
earthly  ministry.  To  the  reader  familiar  with  the  literary  style  of  the 
canonical  gospels  the  narrative  resembles  an  evangelium 
in  nuce.  John's 
speech  begins  with  the  call  of the  disciples,  recalls  several  events  in  the 
"ministry"  of Jesus,  and  ends  with  a  "crucifixion"  and  a  metamorphosis-
epiphany.  There  is  an  historic  placename  in  this  recital, just  as there  are 
in  the  narratives  of the  canonical  gospels,  i.e.,  Gennessaret  (92; cf  Mark 
6:53  and  parallels).  John  s speech  so resembles  the  narrative-gospel  style 
that  Sturhahn  believes  the  AJn's  source  for  87-105  to  be  a  "gnostic 
gospel"  (1951,  in  Kaestli,  1981: 56-57). 

The  rhetorical  and  theological  thrust  of  this  "mini-gospel"  is  con(cid:173)
trolled  by  three  Jesus-metamorphosis  tales.  These  stories  of Jesus  tran-
figured  are  analogous  to  the  metamorphosis  tradition  in  Mk  9:2-8  and 
parallels  and  to  the  ascension  story  in  the  canonical  Acts.  However,  with 
the  exception  of formal  elements  and  the  names of the disciples  involved, 
the  parallels  between  the  metamorphoses  in  the  AJn  and  those  in  the 
synoptic  gospels  are  general  descriptions  common  to  most  epiphanic 
tales  (Smith:  243-244).  Attempts  to  show  a literary  relationship  between 
the  synoptics'  transfiguration  stories  and  those  in  the  apocryphal  Acts 
have  not  been  convincing"  (see  Blinzler:  2-63;  Boobyer:  13  and  30-46; 
Baltensweiler:  21-29; and  Bultmann:  259-260). 

The  first  two  metamorphoses  in  the  AJn  appear  back  to  back  in  the 
text,  and  are  joined  together  by  an  unsophisticated  rhetorical  device: 
"again."  They  are  not  a  doublet  inasmuch  as  they  have  too  little  in 
common.  The  first  tale  is   brief: 

Once, when he took me, James and Peter to the mountain  where 
it was his custom to pray, we saw on him a light such as a man who 
uses  mortal  speech  cannot  describe.  (90) 

The  second  transfiguration  is  more  detailed: 

Cartlidge:  Transfigurations  of  Metamorphosis  Traditions 

55 

Again  he  took  us  three  up  the  mountain,  saying,  "Come  with 
me." And  again we  saw him  at a distance  praying.  Then  I,  since 
he  loved  me,  went  quietly  up  to him,  as if he  could  not  see  and 
stood looking at his hinder parts. (90) 

Now  John  sees  Jesus  naked  "and  not  like  a  man  at  all"  (90).  Jesus 
stretches  from  the  earth  to the  heavens.  John  is justly  afraid,  and  Jesus— 
suddenly  in  the  form  of a little  man—turns  around  and  pulls John's  beard 
so that  it  hurts  him  for  thirty  days:  "Lord,  if your  playful  tug  has  caused 
such pain,  what  if you had  struck  me?" (90). In addition  to the  beard-pull, 
Jesus rebukes  him by  saying: "John  do not be faithless,  but believing,  and 
not  inquisitive.  .  .  .  Let  it be  your  concern  not  to  tempt  him  that  cannot 
be  tempted"  (90). 

The  text  of  this  scene  is  corrupt.  Immediately  preceding  the  two 
metamorphosis  tales,  there  is  a  "little  gap"  (Lipsius  and  Bonnet:  2.1. 
195),  which  follows  a  scene  and  suggests  that  Jesus'  polymorphism  ex(cid:173)
tends  to  his  sexuality:  when  Jesus  held  John  to  his  breast,  it  was 
".  .  .  sometimes  .  .  .  smooth  and  soft,  but  sometimes  hard  like  a 
rock  .  .  ."  (89; cf the  Apocryphon  of John  [CG  ILI]:  "I  am  the  Father;  I 
am  the  Mother"). 

By  the  end  of ch.  90,  Jesus  has  rebuked  John  for  sneaking  a  look  at 
Jesus'  transfigured  form.  But  in  spite  of  the  rebuke,  John  has  been  "on 
high"  (epi  ton  hypsous;  "on  the  mountain  top")  with  Jesus  (91),  and  has 
"considered  his  abundant  grace  and  his  unity  in  many  faces 
(poly-
prosöpon  henotêta)  and  unceasing wisdom" (sophia).  As we  shall see,  the 
final  revelation  for  John  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  is  Jesus'  "one  form"  or 
"one  essence"  (mia  morphê). 

Now  Peter  and  James  are  "vexed"  that  John  has  been  given  a  priv(cid:173)

ileged  position  among  the  disciples; John  has  insight  that  they  lack: 

"Who  was  it  who  spoke  with  the  Lord  when  he  was  on  (the 
mountain)  top?  For we heard  them  both  speaking. " And when  I 
considered  his  abundant  grace  and  his  unity  within  many  faces 
and  his  unceasing  wisdom  that  looks  after  us,  I  said,  "You  shall 
learn from  him if you ask him".  (91) 

The  scene  of the  metamorphosis  presents  the  main  themes  of John's 
entire  homily.  First,  John  assumes  priority  over  the  other  apostles. 
Second,  the  polymorphic  nature  of Jesus  becomes  the  chief  interpreta(cid:173)
tion  of  the  metamorphoses,  an  interpretation  which  is  repeatedly  pro(cid:173)
claimed  later.  Third,  the  docetic  theology  of  the  AJn  is  strengthened. 
Attending  this docetism  is a polemic against those who would  rather  have 
a Jesus  of  flesh  and  blood  as an  object  of  faith: 

56 

Semeia 

And  I often  wished,  as I walked with him,  to see his footprint  in 
the  earth,  whether  it  appeared—for  I  saw  him  raising  himself 
from  the earth—and  I never saw it.  And I tell you this much,  my 
brethren,  so as to encourage your faith in him: for his miracles and 
wonderful  works  must  not  be  told  for  the  moment,  for  they  are 
unspeakable and,  perhaps, can neither be uttered nor heard. (93) 

This  speech  summarizes  the  themes  in  the  first  section  of  John's 
sermon,  and  represents  the  dramatic  structure  of  the  homily.  John  has 
now  exhibited  to  his  hearers  that  he  too  had  great  difficulty  understand(cid:173)
ing the  mystery  of  Jesus' polymorphism;  he,  like his hearers,  had  not  yet 
been  "firmed  up"  in  the  faith.  During  his  discipleship,  John  himself  was 
confused  by  Jesus'  protean  nature: 

I  will  tell  you  another  doksa  .  .  .  sometimes  when  I  meant  to 
touch him I encountered a material, solid body; but at other times 
again  when  I  felt  him,  his  substance  was  immaterial  and  incor(cid:173)
poreal,  and as if it did not exist at all. (93) 

Fourth,  the  passage  erects  a  hierarchy  of  revelation.  In  the  first 
section  of the  narrative,  John's  hearers  are  denied  insight  into Jesus'  true 
nature,  although  the  reader  knows  that John  has  seen  more  in the  second 
transfiguration  story  than  he  did  in  the  first.  Peter  and  James  are  left 
behind  in  understanding,  even  though  John's  sneaking a look into that  for 
which  he  is  not  ready  was  painful  to  him.  Now  the  scene  is  set  for  the 
climactic  event:  the  dance  and  hymn  in  chs.  93-96  and  the  final  revela(cid:173)
tion  to John  on  the  Mount  of Olives. 

The  hymn  itself  emphasizes  the  themes  already  established  (see 
Kaestli,  1981: 56-57).  One  might  even  argue  that  the  hymn  contributes 
to  the  structuring  of  the  sermon's  "gospel-type"  narrative  just  as 
Bornkamm  argued  in  the  case  of the  hymns  in  the  ATh  (passim;  cf  Klijn, 
1962: 34-37).  In  particular,  v.  28-50  of the  hymn  emphasizes  that  "being 
moved  toward wisdom/ you have in me a support,/  rest in me./ Who I  am, 
you shall know/ when  I go forth"  (96). It is precisely when  Jesus goes  forth 
(97-102)  that  John  "knows"  who  Jesus  truly  is.  The  dance  and  hymn 
section  is  a  narrative  of  cultic  initiation  into  a  deep  understanding  of 
Jesus' own christology.  But it is a difficult  theology; the disciples  flee  from 
the  insight  which  they  gained  in  the  initiation  (cf Mk  14:50-52). 

John's  flight  takes  him  to the  Mount  of Olives.  There  he  is witness  to 
a  sham  crucifixion  and  is  led  by  the  real  Jesus  in  still  a  third  experience 
which  is  a  metamorphosis  and  an  ascension  all  in  one.  The  event  is  a 
highly  occult  experience  erupting  in  mystical  revelation.  Thus,  it  is  on 
the  Mount  of Olives that John knows the  ultimate  truth  about  the  essence 
of the  savior.  Unfortunately,  this  revelation  has come  down  to us  in  a  text 
notoriously  corrupt.  We  can,  however,  discern  the  following:  First,  John 

Cartlidge: Transfigurations  of  Metamorphosis  Traditions 

57 

is the  only apostle with  true  insight  into the  nature  of tradition  and  of the 
savior:  "John,  there  must  be  one  man  to hear  these  things  from  me; for  I 
need  one  who  is ready  to  hear"  (98; emphasis  mine). 

Second,  the  rhetoric of this scene is cleverly wrought.  Jesus  and  John 
stand  on  the  Mount  of Olives  and  observe  "Jesus'  " being crucified  below 
them.  This  "split-screen"  effect  strongly  reinforces  the  theological  point, 
namely,  that  the  redeemer  and  his  apostle  have  "ascended"  beyond  the 
point at which other  Christian  theological traditions  stand.  The rest of the 
faithful  are  left  behind,  still  gathered  around  the  cross  with  the  multi(cid:173)
tude.  To  them  the  cross  (and  Jesus)  have  no  single  form  (mia  morphê) 
(98).  John,  however,  sees  the  Lord  above  the  cross,  "Having  no  schema 
but  having  only  a  certain  voice  which  we  knew,  but  one  that  was  sweet 
and  gentle  and  truly  that  of God"  (98). Jesus  reveals  that 

"The  Cross of Light  is called  Logos by me for  your  sakes,  some(cid:173)
times  Jesus,  sometimes  Christ,  sometimes  a  door,  sometimes  a 
way, sometimes bread,  sometimes  seed,  sometimes  resurrection, 
sometimes  Father,  sometimes  Spirit,  sometimes  Life,  sometimes 
truth,  sometimes faith,  sometimes  grace; and so these things are 
for men's sake.  . . ."  (98) 

The multitude  around the cross that is not of one form  is the 
transitory nature (physis hyparchê).  .  .  . But when human  nature 
is taken  up,  and  the  race  that  comes  to me and  obeys  my voice, 
then he who now hears me shall be united with them and shall no 
longer  be  what  he  is  now,  but  shall  be  above  them  as  I  am 
now.  .  .  . Therefore  ignore  the  many  and  despise  those  who  are 
outside  the  mystêrion; for  you  must know that  I am wholly with 
the  Father,  and the  Father with me". (100) 

Chs.  87-105  end  with  a docetic  exhortation  to  the  audience:  "You  there(cid:173)
fore  beloved  (must)  also  be persuaded,  that  it  is  not  a  man  that  I  exhort 
you  to worship,  but  God  unchangeable,  God  invincible" (104). 

2.  The  Acts  of  Thomas 

ATh  143  sets  its  version  of  Jesus'  metamorphosis  in  a  prayer-cum-
sermon  delivered  by  the  apostle while  in prison.  Judas Thomas  has  been 
arrested  at  the  order  of  Misdaeus,  the  King.  While  in  prison,  Judas  is 
visited  by  Vazan,  the  king's  son.  Vazan  is  the  audience  for  Thomas' 
speech,  which  begins  as  a prayer  but  soon  loses  its  invocative  flavor  and 
becomes  a sermon  and  last testament  of the  apostle. 

Thomas'  speech  contains  a  creed  which  begins  with  highly  esoteric 
pronouncements,  e.g.,  "Most  high,  he  is  become  from  the  greatest  the 
only  son  of Bathos." The  creed  soon becomes  a narrative-credo  form,  but 
with  a clearly  docetic  shift: 

58 

Semeia 

"and  he  was called son of Mary  a virgin,  and  was termed  son of 
Joseph  a carpenter.  He whose lowliness we beheld with the  eyes 
of the body, but his greatness (megaleiotêta) we received by faith, 
and we saw his works ergots; whose human body we handled with 
our  hands,  and  his  appearance  (thean)  we  saw transfigured  (en-
êlloiomenên) with  our  eyes,  but  his heavenly  typos we could  not 
see on the mountain.  . . ."  (143; emphasis  mine) 

This "creed" bears elements which  strongly  suggest that it  represents 
received  tradition,  e.g.,  the  antithetic  parallelism.  The  ATh  or  its  tradi(cid:173)
tion  have  either  adapted  a  credo  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  Judas 
Thomas' witness  or, what  is more  likely,  does  not know the customary  trio 
of apostles whom  other  traditions hold  as witnesses to the  transfiguration. 
In  either  case,  Judas  Thomas  is the  principle  bearer  of the  true  tradition. 
Thomas'  sermon  is  accompanied  by  a  series  of  miraculous  events. 
Tertia,  Mygdonia,  and  Marcia  have  been  locked  in  their  rooms  by  their 
men,  who  believe  that  Judas  is  a  seducer  and  sorcerer  and  that  the 
women  are  his  "groupies."  Jesus,  in  the  form  of Thomas,  appears  to  the 
women  and  releases  them  from  their  connubial  confinement  (151-153). 
The  women  are  then  understandably  astonished  when,  after  they  have 
hastened  to  the  prison,  they  find  Thomas  incarcerated:  "When 
the 
apostle  heard  [the  story  of  their  release],  he  said,  'Glory  to  you  poly(cid:173)
morphic  Jesus,  glory  to  you  who  dost  appear  in  the  guise  of  our  poor 
manhood'"  (153). 

The  little  band  of the  faithful  miraculously  escapes  from  the  prison, 
after  a "bright  light" fills the jail (153-154).  Vazan is sent ahead  to  prepare 
for  the  initiation  ceremony;  on  the  way he  meets  his wife,  Mnesara,  who 
has  been  miraculously  raised  from  a  sick-bed  and  led  to  Vazan  by  a 
"young  man,"  i.e.,  Jesus  (154).  There  is  an  unction  ceremony  (157)  and 
an  ascetic  eucharist  (158). Judas  then  goes  to  martyrdom. 

The  metamorphosis  story  supports  the  Acts'  contention  that  Jesus 
and  Judas  Thomas  are  truly  "twins"  (thömas;  didymos).  As is the  case  with 
the  first  two  metamorphoses  in  the  AJn  (90-91),  the 
transfiguration 
account  in  the  ATh  does  not  give  the  witnesses  insight  into  the  highest 
nature  of  the  redeemer:  "We  did  not  see  his  heavenly  typos  on  the 
mountain  . . ."  (143).  The  greatest  insight  comes  to  Christians  when  the 
polymorphic  Jesus,  usually  in  the  morphê  of Thomas,  leads  them  into  a 
sacred  marriage  (14-15;  146),  into  the  "koinonia"  of the  male" (50). 

3.  The  Acts  of  Peter 

APt  20-21  places  the  Jesus-metamorphosis  story  in  the  context  of a 
sermon  preached  by  the  apostle,  just  as  do  the  AJn  and  the  ATh.  Peter 
preaches  and  performs  miracles  in the  house  of Marcellus just  before  the 
apostle  engages  in  his  miracle-working  "shoot-out"  with  his  arch-enemy, 

Cartlidge:  Transfigurations  of Metamorphosis  Traditions 

59 

Simon  Magos.  As  Peter  enters  the  triclinium  of  Marcellus'  house,  he 
finds  a  worship  service  in  progress;  someone  is  reading  a  portion  of  a 
gospel.  Peter  "rolls  up  the  book"  and  preaches  a  sermon.  From  the 
context  we  learn  that  the  gospel  reading  of the  day  was  a  transfiguration 
story. 

The  apostle  starts  by  making  a  disclaimer  for  the  written  word. 
Although  he  and  the  other  apostles  tried  as  much  as  flesh  could,  they 
could  not  begin  to  record  what  actually  occurred,  for 

the  Lord  in  his  mercy  was  moved  to  show  himself  in  another 
shape and  to be  seen  in the form  of a man,  on whom neither  the 
Jews  nor  we  were  worthy  to  be  enlightened.  And  now  I  will 
explain  to you what has just  been  read  to you.  Our  Lord  wished 
me to see his majesty  on the holy mountain; but when I with  the 
sons of Zebedee  saw the brilliance of his light,  I fell as one  dead, 
and closed my eyes and head his voice, such as I cannot describe, 
and  thought  that  I  have  been  blinded  by  his  radiance.  And 
recovering  my breath  a little  I said to myself,  "Perhaps  my  Lord 
willed to bring me here to deprive me of my sight." And I said, "If 
this be your will, Lord,  I do not constrain it." And he gave me his 
hand  and lifted  me up. And when  I stood up I saw him  in such a 
form  as I was able to take in". (20) 

The  sermon  concludes  with  a  paean  of  praise  for  Jesus'  polymorphism; 
the  protean  character  of Jesus  is  a  grace  to  the  church  in  that  everyone 
can  see  Jesus  as he  or  she  is able  to  understand  (21). 

The  symbols  of light/enlightenment  and  blindness/giving  of sight  are 
crucial  tropes  in  Peter's  sermon  and  in  the  events  which  surround  it. 
These  symbols  combine  with  that  of  the  polymorphic  Jesus  to  become 
the  metaphor  for  the  entire  scene  in  Marcellus'  house.  Before  he 
preaches,  Peter  restores  sight  to  an  blind  widow.  After  the  sermon, 
several  other  widows  wish  to  recover  sight.  They  are  healed  when  a 
brilliant  light,  "like  lightning,"  fills  the  room.  Each  widow  reports  a 
vision  in which  she  has  seen  Jesus  in  a form  different  from  those  seen  by 
the  others: "an old  man," "a growing lad," "a boy who gently  touched  our 
eyes,  and  so our  eyes were  opened"  (21).  Peter  then  praises  God  who  "is 
greater  than  our  thoughts  as we have learned  from  the  aged widows,  how 
they  have  seen  the  Lord  in  a variety  of  forms"  (21). The  scene  reaches  its 
denouement  in  a  vision  which  comes  to  Marcellus,  a  vision  which 
foresees  the  victory  of Peter  over  Simon  Magos  (22). 

4.  The  "Aretalogical"  Pattern 

In  spite  of the  significant  differences  in these  various  metamorphosis 

accounts  there  is a rather  consistent  pattern  of  presentation. 

60 

Semeia 

4.1.  In  each  the  metamorphosis  account  appears  in  an  apostolic  speech 
or  sermon. 

4.2.  The  apostolic  recitals  establish  each  particular  Acts' primary  apostle 
as  the  true  interpreter  of the  tradition  and  rejects  others' versions  of  the 
tradition. 

4.3.  In  each  of the  Acts  metamorphosis  stories  proclaim  a christology  of 
the  polymorphic  Jesus.  They  are  deliberately  ambiguous  epiphanies. 
Those  who  see  Jesus  in  these  many  forms  cannot  perceive  the  savior's 
true  morphê. 

4.4.  Each  metamorphosis  story  is the  focal  point  of a recital  of  dominical 
and  apostolic  wonder-working.  In  the  ATh  the  form  of  the  recital  is  a 
brief,  liturgical  credo:  "His  greatness  we  received  by  faith,  and  saw it  in 
his  works  (ergots)"  (143).  In  the  AJn  the  metamorphsis  appears  in  a 
recital  of  Jesus'  acts  in  which  the  main  theme  is  to  show  how  the 
redeemer's  shape-changing  confuses  the  disciples.  The APt's tale  appears 
in  a narration  of Jesus'  healings.  Peter  concludes  with  a credal  statement 
of  Jesus'  polymorphism  and  docetic  nature.  Through  his  many-guised 
appearances  Jesus  becomes  all  things  to  everyone  in  the  APt.  The 
recital's  antithetic  form  expresses  the  universality  of  Christly  poly(cid:173)
morphism. 

.  .  . whom no flesh has seen, 
yet now he is seen; 
whom no hearing has  found 
yet now he is known as the word that is heard  .  . . 
who is before  the world, 
yet now is comprehended  in time  .  . . 
this Jesus you have brethren, 
the door,  the light,  the way, the bread,  the  life, 
the  resurrection,  the refreshment,  the pearl, 
the treasure,  the seen,  the  abundance, 
the  mustard  seed.  .  . . 
He is all things,  and there is no greater than  he 
.(20;cf98andAJnl00). 

Actus  Vercellenses  and  the  Greek  differ  considerably  in  this  speech,  but 
each  emphasizes  that  Jesus  is capable  of being  understood  at  some  level 
by  each  of the  faithful,  no  matter  how  lowly. 

4.5.  The  metamorphosis  tales  in  these  three  Acts  appear  in  scenes 
presenting  the  apostle  in  a  contest  of  power  with  his  most  formidable 
adversary.  Apostolic  power  appears  as  an  extension  of  the  polymorphic 
Jesus'  strength.  In  the  APt  the  apostle  heals  and  enlightens  the  little 
band  gathered  in  Marcellus' house,  and he is prepared  for the great  battle 
with  the  Magos.  In  the  ATh  the  apostle  and  his  evangelism  prevail  over 

Cartlidge:  Transfigurations  of  Metamorphosis  Traditions 

61 

the  king  and  his  minions;  Judas'  triumph  is  the  conversion  of the  king's 
household.  In  the  AJn  the  metamorphosis  of Jesus  grounds  the  theology 
of  the  document's  sect  over  against  the  world  and  against  other  the(cid:173)
ologies. 

4.6.  The  sermon  of  the  apostle  in  each  of  these  three  Acts  either  de(cid:173)
scribes  an  initiation  into  the  community  or  leads  to  such  an  initiation. 
The  initiation  is  the  cultic  climax  of  the  apostle's  recital.  Only  after 
initiation  does  one  learn  the  mystery  of Jesus,  a  mystery  hidden  by  the 
redeemer's  polymorphic  glory. 

This  pattern  connected  to  the  apocryphal  Acts'  telling  of  Jesus-
metamorphosis  traditions  corresponds  to  cognate  developments  in  the 
early  church.  Several  critics  have  pointed  to  Mark's  and  John's  employ(cid:173)
ment  of collections  of tales  in  which  miraculous  deeds  are  attributed  to 
Jesus  (Achtemeier,  1968;  Koester:  187-193;  Smith:  166  and  225-226; 
Talbert:  116,  and  Georgi:  282-292.)  These  collections  have  their  pagan 
counterparts  as well.  Several of these  authors,  including  Smith  (173-177), 
have  shown  how  initiations  often  become  part  of  miracle  story  collec(cid:173)
tions.  Further,  such  miracle  collections  were  capped  by  a  super-miracle 
(e.g.,  the  metamorphosis  of  Jesus).  The  catenae  of miracles  likely  served 
as foundation  myths  of their  particular  cultus  (Achtemeier:  416-417,  and 
especially  Talbert:  101). 

That  the  AJn,  APt,  and  ATh  carry  on  this  combination  of  miracle 
story,  metamorphosis  tale and  initiation  in crucial parts of their  narratives 
lends  credence,  therefore,  to Helmut  Koester's claim that  the  apocryphal 
Acts  are  the  literary  extensions  of the  miracle-story  'gospels,' rather  than 
new  gospels  (192).  Not  only  do  the  Acts  celebrate  the  divine  power  of 
miracle-working;  their  heroes  are  a  continuation  of  the  wandering,  as(cid:173)
cetic,  ecstatic,  and  wonder-working  prophets  of the  early  church  (ibid., 
and  Theissen,  1970:  7-23;  1973: 259-271).  It  was  among  these  prophets 
and  their  support  groups  in  towns  and  cities  that  the  'gospel'  genre  of 
miracle-story  collections  served  and  grew. 

There  is  a  reference  to  the  transfiguration  of Jesus  in  the  canonical 
literature,  namely,  2  Pet  1:16-18,  which  seems  to  be  aware  of  and 
opposed  to  the  employment  of the  transfiguration  to  ground  a  "miracle-
story"  christology: 

For  we  did  not  follow  subtly  fashioned  myths  when  we  made 
known to you the dynamis and parousia, but we saw for ourselves 
his grandeur.  For when he received honor and glory from  God the 
Father,  and  the  voice  was  borne  to  him  by  the  sublime  glory, 
"This  is  my  son,  my  beloved,  he  is  the  one  in  whom  I  am 
pleased," we ourselves  heard  this voice borne  upon  him  on  "the 
holy mountain".  (2 Pet 1:16-18). 

62 

Semeia 

The  occasion  of  2  Peter  may  or  may  not  be  precisely  as  Käsemann 
describes  it,  as  a  defensus  fidei  for  apocalyptic  Christology  over  against 
gnosticism  (169-195),  but  2  Peter  surely  emphasizes  the  role  of  the 
parousia 
in  1:16-18.  The  APt,  on  the  other  hand,  has  subordinated 
parousia  to  dynamis.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  petrine  material  is 
the  only  literature  which  describes  the  mountain  of  transfiguration  as 
"the  holy  mountain."  The  author  of the  epistle  does  appear  to have  been 
well  acquainted  with  an  interpretation  of  the  transfiguration  traditions 
which emphasized  the  miracle-working (dynamis)  aspects of  Jesus'  doksa. 
The  APt  is  a document  which  exhibits  that  very  trend. 

5.  Theological  Patterns 

In  spite  of this  shared  pattern  in  the  metamorphosis  stories  in  these 
three  Acts,  they  employ  the  pattern  to  confess  their  own  distinctive 
theologies. 

5.1.  The  Acts  of  Peter.  In  chs.  1-29  and  in  Peter's  battle  with  Simon 
Magos  the  power  of  the  divine  is  manifest  through  miracle-working.  As 
Gérard  Poupon  puts  it,  "The  Acts  of Peter  illustrate  almost  as  a piece  of 
theater  the  antagonism  between  thaumaturge  and  magician"  (77).  Peter's 
summary  of  the  gospel  message  in  ch.  7  speaks  for  the  whole  of  this 
theme  in  the  APt: 

For this is not only to convince you with words that it is the Christ 
that  I  am  preaching,  but  indeed  (etiam)  by  deeds  (tactis)  and 
marvellous powers (virtutibus  magnificiis) I urge you through  the 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  none  of  you  should  expect  another 
"savior"  than  him  who  was  despised  and  mocked  by  Jews,  this 
Nazarene who was crucified  and died and rose again the third day. 

The  martyrdom  of  Peter  (30-41)  is  included  in  the  only  "complete" 
manuscript  we have of the APt,  although  the  martyrdom  circulated  in  the 
church  separately  from  chs.  1-29.  It  has been  noted  that  the  character  of 
the  martyrdom,  namely,  its  reliance  upon  speeches,  differs  from  that  of 
1-29  (Schneemelcher  in  Hennecke  and  Schneemelcher:  272-275).  How(cid:173)
ever,  the  miracle-contest  between  Simon  Peter  and  Simon  Magos,  which 
is  the  backbone  of  1-29,  extends  into   30-41.  There,  rhetorical  interests 
which  accompany  martyrology  overcome  the  teratalogical  thrust  which 
begins  the  APt. 

I  suggest  that  one  main  source  of the APt,  whatever  the  Acts'  precise 
literary  history,  was  a collection  of Peter's  marvelous  acts,  held  together 
by  the  plot  of Peter's  continuing  battle  with  Simon  Magos.  If this  sugges(cid:173)
tion  be  tenable,  chs.  1-29  and  the  final  contest  in  30-41  emphasize  the 

Cartlidge:  Transfigurations  of Metamorphosis  Traditions 

63 

proper  theme  for  such  a  collection:  Peter  is  considered  tamquam  deum 
(29;  cf.  John  5:18).  Furthermore,  if  there  were  such  an  antecedent 
collection,  it would  fit  well contemporary  descriptions  of such  "primitive 
'gospel'  genres"  (Koester:  192; Achtemeier:  passim). 

This  hypothesized  "petrine  aretalogy"  includes  a  sea-miracle  (5), 
many  healings  and  teratalogical  acts,  a  resurrection,  and  an  ascension 
contest.  In  this  contest,  the  Magos  fails  comically—he  does  "fly  around" 
Rome  in  a  persiflage  of an  ascension,  but  Peter  shoots  down  the  Magos 
with  prayer  (30-31).  Peter  is  crucified  (37-9),  buried,  and  appears  to 
Marcellus  after  the  apostle's  death  (40).  Peter's  crucifixion  is an  ascension 
to  the  Lord  and  to  true  understanding  of the  nature  of the  Christ  (38). 

Our  suggestion  that  an  aretalogy  of  Peter's  "signs  and  wonders" 

underlies  the  APt  is  only  a  suggestion,  a  recognizably  preliminary  hy(cid:173)
pothesis.  Its  validity  awaits  philological  and  formal  studies. 

However,  Peter's  contest  with  the  Magos  is  certainly  an 

imitatio 
throughout.  Theologies  which  proclaim  that  the  disciples  of  a 
Christi 
miracle  worker  become  extensions  of  the  cultus'  founding  prophet 
through  the  disciples'  teratalogical  acts  are  not  unusual  in  late  antiquity. 
The  APt  has  preserved  this  tradition  in  a  manner  which  is  virtually  a 
paradigm  of  the  traditions  about  Jesus  which  lay   chief,  if  not  exclusive 
weight  upon  Jesus  as  a "man  who  was  attested  to you  by  God  by  powers 
(dynamesi)  and  wonders  (terasi)  and  signs  (sëmeiois)  . . ."  (Acts 2:22). 

suggests 

in  Hennecke 

(Schneemelcher 

The  APt's  ecclesiology  assumes  churches.  This  may  be  due  to  the 
author's  dealing  with  the  fact  of an  established  congregation  in  Rome,  as 
Schneemelcher 
and 
Schneemelcher:  271).  The  AJn  and  the  ATh,  on  the  other  hand,  portray 
their  apostles  as charismatics who wander  and collect devotees.  The  APt's 
interpretation  of  the  metamorphosis  and  of  the  polymorphic  Jesus  fits 
well  into  its  picture  of the  church  as  a group  of particular  congregations. 
The  polymorphic  Jesus  of  the  APt  works  wonders;  out  of  this  poly(cid:173)
morphism,  the  apostle(s)  continue  Jesus' wonder-working  for  the  sake  of 
the  ecclèsia. 

Jesus'  many  forms  and  appearances  grace  the  entire  church  in  that 
the  faithful,  no  matter  what  their  ability,  "may  love (the  one) who  is  both 
great  and  little,  beautiful  and  ugly,  young and  old,  appearing  in  time  and 
yet  in  eternity  wholly  invisible"  (20). There  is a sense  of inclusiveness  in 
the  polymorphic  Christology  of the  APt. 

5.2.  The  Acts  of  Thomas.  The  many-guised  Christ  is  the  ATh's  solution 
for  the  crisis  of continuity  which  strikes  a community  as  the  time  of  the 
foundaton  myth  and  of  the  founding  prophet  fades  behind  the  com(cid:173)
munity  in  the  passage  of time.  The  "twin  brother"  status  of Thomas  is  a 
symbolic  extension  of the  redeemer's  salvific  power  into  the  time  of  the 
community.  This  aspect  of the  twin  identities  of Jesus  and  Judas  Thomas 

64 

Semeia 

is  not  confined  to  the  section  of  the  Acts  which  contains  the  Jesus-
metamorphosis  account. 

Perhaps  the  best  known  metamorphosis  in  the  ATh is that  in  chs.  8-
15.  There,  immediately  after  Judas  Thomas  sings  the  "Wedding  Hymn" 
at a marriage  feast  (6-7),  the  father  of the  bride  asks Judas  to  say a  prayer 
for  the  bridal  pair.  The  apostle  complies.  As  the  bride  and  groom  enter 
the  bridal  chamber,  "The  Lord  Jesus" appears  to them  "in  the  likeness of 
the  apostle  Judas  Thomas"  (11).  Judas-Jesus  preaches  an  ascetic  sermon 
to  the  couple  which  converts  the  bridal  pair  to asceticism,  and  thus  they 
give evidence  that  they  are redeemed.  The bride  has become  the bride of 
the  redeemer  (12); the  groom  has  returned  to the  state  of the  primal  man 
(15). 

Word  plays  upon  koinönein  and  its cognates  carry the  theological  and 
dramatic  action  in  the  ATh.  Thus,  as  koinönein  may  mean  "to  have 
fellowship," or "to  share," as well as "to have  sexual intercourse," the  way 
is  open  for  the  ATh  to  condemn  human  eroticism  and,  by  means  of  puns 
on  koinos  to  extol  the  erotic  in  a  transsexual  union  by  means  of puns  on 
koinönos.  Sexual  union  between  man  and  woman  is  a  koinönos  which  is 
filthy  (12,  88).  There  is,  on  the  other  hand,  "an  incorruptible  and  true 
marriage" (12) in which  one  is in  "the  koinönia  of the  male" (50) and  "the 
true  koinönia"  (88). 

Most of the  occurrences  of  koinönein  and  its cognates  in the ATh  take 
place  in  the  sacramental  acts  of  the  community.  The  epiklëseis  are  said 
during  the  unction  (sealing)  and  the  eucharist  (27  and  50).  Mygdonia 
enters  the  hieros  gamos  after  receiving  the  "seal"  (120).  She  explains  to 
her  husband,  after  she  has  partaken  of  the  eucharist,  "You  know  that 
marriage  of  corruption 
.  .  .  but  this  marriage  remains  forever;  that 
koinönia  was  one  that  passes  away,  this  is of life  eternal"  (124). 

Christ's  union  with  the  believers  in  the  sacraments  and  in  their  fight 
to  maintain  the  cultic  integrity  of  the  community  (i.e.,  to  remain  as-
cetically pure) is  koinönos  (intercourse/fellowship)  (49 and 50). The  exten(cid:173)
sion  of  salvific  power  from  Christ  through  the  apostle  is  therefore 
basically  sacramental  in the  ATh.  Teratalogical  acts and  saving  knowledge 
play  a  strong  role  in  the  ATh—as  in  the  APt  and  the  AJn—but  here  the 
polymorphism  of  the  savior  appears  in  sacramental-liturgical  contexts. 
The  twins,  Judas  Thomas  and  Jesus,  are  established  as  such  by 
aretalogical  means,  an  aretalogy  built  around  the  climactic  Jesus-meta(cid:173)
morphosis.  The  central  aretê,  however,  is  sacramental.  The  faithful  can 
only  see  through  this  polymorphic  screen  to  the  nature  of the  redeemer 
and  of redemption  when  they have received  the  "seal upon  the  seal" (27). 

5.3.  The  Acts  of John.  The  theology  of the  AJn  is  difficult  to  summarize 
systematically  if  only  because  of  the  state  of  the  text.  Most  studies 

Cartlidge:  Transfigurations  of  Metamorphosis  Traditions 

65 

therefore  tend  to  rely  upon  chs.  87-105  to  establish  that  the  AJn  is 
related  to Valentinian  gnosticism  (for  example  Schaeferdiek  in  Hennecke 
and  Schneemelcher:  212-214,  and  Kaestli,  1981: 57).  The  episodes  re(cid:173)
corded  outside  87-105  reveal  at  least  a  strong  docetic  and  ascetic 
character;  in  addition,  they  dwell  on  miraculous  events,  especially  upon 
the  raising  of the  dead. 

The  polymorphic  Christology  which  is  so  important  in  87-105  does 
play  a significant  role  elsewhere  in  the  AJn—especially  in  relationship  to 
Drusiana.  The  metamorphosis  of  Jesus  and  the  resultant  polymorphic 
appearances  of the  Lord  establish  a  strict  hierarchy  of  salvation,  i.e.,  of 
saving  knowledge.  Only  those  who  have  experienced  the  polymorphic 
Christ  and  his  teratalogical  power  have  true  insight  into  the  nature  of 
Christ  and  of salvation.  Thus,  Drusiana  knows  the  "polymorphic"  nature 
of  Christ;  she  has  been  raised  by  his  power.  When  she  reports  her 
experience  of Jesus'  "many  faces,"  the  uninitiated  simply  cannot  handle 
this  strong  theology. 

To the  uninitiated  Jesus' polymorphism  is a form  of  deus  absconditus 
totaliter 
Its  purpose  is  to  confuse  and  to  conceal  the  true  nature  of  the 
redeemer  from  those  who  are  not  in  an  inner  circle  of  understanding. 
Those who  are "outside  the  mystërion"  cannot  see  the  mia  morphê  of the 
savior. 

Thus,  behind  the  many-guised  Jesus  in  the  AJn  lies  the  true  picture 
of the  redeemer  and  the  redeemer's  continued  saving power.  This  salvific 
power  is  expressed  in  miraculous  acts,  especially  in  the  raising  of  the 
dead.  But  beyond  this  symbol  is  the  savior  who  is  the  divine  revealer  (a 
notion  not  unfamiliar  elsewhere  in  Johannine  literature),  the  one  who 
brings  saving  understanding,  who  is  "the  distinction  of  things  .  .  .  and 
the  harmony  of wisdom,  being  wisdom  in  harmony"  (98);  he  is  the  one 
who  said:  "For  so  long  as  you  do  not  call  yourself  mine,  I  am  not  what  I 
am; but  if you hear  me  .  .  . you  shall be  as I am  . ..  for from  me  you  are" 
(100; caveat  lector:  the  text  here  is corrupt  in  the  extreme). 

The  AJn's  christology  serves  a strong  dichotomy  between  those  who 
can  only  wonder  at  Jesus'  many  forms  and  are  confused  by  them  and 
those  who  are  initiated  into  true  insight.  The  latter  are  undisputedly  the 
apostle  John  and  his  followers;  he  is  "the  one  man"  who  knows  the  true 
morphê  of the  Lord.  We,  the  readers  of the AJn,  are therefore  let into  the 
inner  circle  as  well.  As  the  AJn  puts  it,  "despise  those  who  are  outside 
the  mystery"  (100). 

N.B.  Another  early  church  interpretation  of  the  Jesus-metamorphosed 
tradition  is  Origen's  in  Contra  Celsum  11.64  (Chadwick:  115).  Origen 
connects  the  tradition  with  a polymorphic  christology.  He  interprets  the 
polymorphism  of Jesus  as  the  path  to  a  hierarchy  of gnosis:  only  Peter, 

66 

Semeia 

James,  and  John  went  to  the  mountain-top  with  Jesus  because  "they 
alone  had  the  capacity  to see  his glory. " But  polymorphism  is also a boon 
to the faithful,  a grace: "he  did  not  appear  the  same  to those who were  ill 
and  needed  his  healing  as  he  did  to  those  who  were  able  to  ascend  the 
mountain  with  him  and  were  in  good  health."  The  transfiguration  tradi(cid:173)
tion  becomes  an  allegory  for  the  diversity  of  revelational  experiences 
within  the  church. 

6.  Conclusion 

The  Acts  of John,  Peter,  and  Thomas  employ  and  exegete  traditions 
of Jesus-metamorphosed,  each  to  its  own  theological  purpose.  Even  so, 
there  remain  throughout  the  theologically  diverse  presentations  of  the 
metamorphosis  traditions  evidence  of traditional  patterns  associated  with 
the  story  of Jesus-transfigured,  e.g.,  the  rhetorical  pattern  in  which  the 
metamorphosis 
the  polymorphic 
christology.  The  rhetorical  pattern—which  is  cognate  with  what  many 
modern  critics  call  "aretalogies"—appears  in  association  with  the  meta(cid:173)
morphosis  accounts  at  least  as  early  as  the  writing  of  Mark.  The  pattern 
may  have  been  part  of the  miracle  story  collections  which  Mark  used  as 
sources. 

tales  are  presented 

to  support 

We  have  the  beginnings  of an  outline  of the  church's  employment  of 
an  old  and  venerable  piece  of tradition.  The  outline  begins  with  miracle-
story  gospels  and continues  to the  apocryphal Acts' use of this tradition  to 
buttress  their  theological  purposes.  The  Acts'  exegesis  of  the  meta(cid:173)
morphosis  traditions  connects  metamorphosis  and  polymorphism.  The 
APt  sees Jesus' polymorphism  as a gift  to the  church,  inasmuch  as  "there 
is  a  Jesus  for  everyone."  The  continuation  of  this  grace  in  the  APt  is 
demonstrated  by  the  apostle's  miracle-working. 

The  ATh  links  Jesus'  polymorphism  to  his  "twinship"  with  Judas 
Thomas.  By so doing it establishes  the continuation  of  Jesus' power  in  the 
community  reinforced  sacramentally.  The  community  is  linked  to  Jesus 
through  cultically  achieved  koinönia  .The  AJn  employs  a  metamorphosis/ 
polymorphosis  theology  to  set  up  an  esoteric  and  hierarchical  ladder  of 
saving  knowledge.  The  community  of  the  AJn  claims  strongly  exclusive 
rights  to  the  true  knowledge  of Jesus  and  the  tradition. 

^s 

Copyright and Use: 

As an ATLAS user, you may print, download, or send articles for individual use 
according to fair use as defined by U.S. and international copyright law and as 
otherwise authorized under your respective ATLAS subscriber agreement. 

No content may be copied or emailed to multiple sites or publicly posted without the 
copyright holder(s)' express written permission. Any use, decompiling, 
reproduction, or distribution of this journal in excess of fair use provisions may be a 
violation of copyright law. 

This journal is made available to you through the ATLAS collection with permission 
from the copyright holder(s). The copyright holder for an entire issue of a journal 
typically is the journal owner, who also may own the copyright in each article. However, 
for certain articles, the author of the article may maintain the copyright in the article. 
Please contact the copyright holder(s) to request permission to use an article or  specific 
work for any use not covered by the fair use provisions of the copyright laws or covered 
by your respective ATLAS subscriber agreement. For information  regarding the 
copyright holder(s), please refer to the copyright information  in the journal, if available, 
or contact ATLA to request contact information  for the copyright holder(s). 

About ATLAS: 

The ATLA Serials (ATLAS®) collection contains electronic versions of previously 
published religion and theology journals reproduced with permission.  The ATLAS 
collection is owned and managed by the American Theological Library Association 
(ATLA) and received initial funding  from Lilly Endowment Inc. 

The design and final form of this electronic document is the property of the American 
Theological Library Association. 

